---
title: "Where on the page was the index entry created?"
description: "Inspired by an old Latin grammar book, Markus Kohm shows how to add superscript markers to index entries that indicate the vertical position on the page."
date: 2011-05-28
author: "Markus Kohm"
tags: ["Index"]
image: "/images/komascript/KOMA-blue.png"
---

At yesterday’s TeX meetup in Ladenburg—curiously enough, the Heidelberg
TeX meetup has been taking place in my neighboring town for several
years now—I was shown a beautiful, old Latin grammar book. What was
particularly nice about it was the index. Next to the page numbers were small
superscript numbers indicating whether the corresponding index entry was
located in the first, second, third, or fourth quarter of the page. This
actually makes it easier to search the page. When you consider that 100 years
ago the entire index was still compiled by hand, you can imagine what a
labor-intensive task that was.

The question that followed was obvious: Can you do this with TeX as
well? My immediate answer: Sure. About a quarter of an hour later, I had a
solution to offer:

```latex
\documentclass[english]{scrartcl}
\usepackage{makeidx}
\usepackage{babel}
\usepackage{blindtext}
\makeindex

\makeatletter
% Definition copied from latex.ltx and modified:
\def\@wrindex#1{%
  \pdfsavepos
   \protected@write\@indexfile{}%
      {\string\indexentry{#1|pmark{\noexpand\the\pdflastypos}}{\thepage}}%
 \endgroup
 \@esphack}
% Additions:
\newcommand*{\pmark}[2]{%
  #2\ifnum #1>\value{Delineation}\textsuperscript{1}\else\textsuperscript{2}\fi}
\newcounter{Delineation}
\setlength{\@tempdima}{.5\paperheight}
\setcounter{Delineation}{\@tempdima}
\makeatother

\usepackage{eso-pic}

\begin{document}
\AddToShipoutPicture{%
  \AtPageLowerLeft{%
    \setlength{\unitlength}{1sp}%
    \put(0,\value{Delineation}){\line(1,0){\LenToUnit{\paperwidth}}}%
  }%
}
\textbf{A}\marginpar{A}\index{TestA}\blindtext
\textbf{B}\marginpar{B}\index{testB}\blindtext
\textbf{C}\marginpar{C}\index{TestC}\blindtext
\textbf{D}\marginpar{D}\index{testD}\blindtext
\textbf{E}\marginpar{E}\index{TestE}\blindtext
\textbf{F}\marginpar{F}\index{testF}\blindtext
\textbf{G}\marginpar{G}\index{TestG}\blindtext
\textbf{H}\marginpar{H}\index{testH}\blindtext
\textbf{A}\marginpar{A}\index{TestA}\blindtext
\printindex
\end{document}
```

Unlike the original problem, this quick solution distinguishes only between
the upper and lower halves of the page (not the type area). Compared to last
night’s solution, the boundary is no longer specified explicitly but is
instead calculated—albeit in a very primitive way—and visualized using
[`eso-pic`](https://www.ctan.org/pkg/eso-pic) so that you can assess whether the entries are correctly
positioned.

To view the result, you need to run `pdflatex` (whether in DVI, PDF, or draft
mode), run MakeIndex, and then run `pdflatex` again. As you can see from the
last entry, this also works when multiple entries are created for a single
term. However, a drawback of this solution is that it relies on page number
formatting to write information about the vertical position to the idx
file. This means that entries like `\index{foo|textbf}` no longer work. The
same applies to `hyperpage` formatting via [`hyperref`](https://www.ctan.org/pkg/hyperref). To re-enable
these features, the solution above would need to be extended in a similar way
to how it is done in newer versions of [`hyperref`](https://www.ctan.org/pkg/hyperref). This is solvable.

Of course, I could also have used the following redefinition:
```latex
\def\@wrindex#1{%
  \pdfsavepos
   \protected@write\@indexfile{}%
      {\string\indexentry{#1}{\thepage\string\pmark{\noexpand\the\pdflastypos}}}%
 \endgroup
 \@esphack}
\newcommand*{\pmark}[1]{%
  \ifnum #1>\value{Delineation}\textsuperscript{1}\else\textsuperscript{2}\fi}
```
In that case, the information about the vertical position would be appended
directly to the page number. Unfortunately, MakeIndex cannot handle this
additional information in the page numbers at all. However, this might be a
possibility for use with Xindy. I’ll leave it to the Xindy experts to come up
with a suitable Xindy solution.

Since my package [`luaindex`](https://www.ctan.org/pkg/luaindex) does not sort page numbers but assumes
that the page numbers are written to the index in the correct order (in which
case, of course, you cannot use QuickSort), an extension to handle this should
also be fairly simple.

Of course, the question immediately arose last night as to whether, instead of
a purely vertical division of the page, one could overlay a proper grid. If
you extend the solution above with `\pdflastxpos` and further refine the case
distinction within `\pmark`, you can achieve this without any major problems.

As you can see, at first glance this was once again a somewhat unusual
question. Nevertheless, it’s one of those curiosities that can be solved using
TeX tools.
