---
title: "Why hasn't there been a new KOMA script in a year?"
description: "Markus Kohm explains why a new KOMA-Script release has been missing for so long, and why beta testers and proofreaders are needed."
date: 2013-07-24
author: "Markus Kohm"
tags: ["Development", "Contribution", "Release"]
image: "/images/komascript/KOMA-blue.png"
---

That’s a good question, and there’s only one—rather poor—answer to it: Because
I don’t have any need for it myself.

The fact is that, for decades, I’ve been creating everything from
architectural plans to novels using LaTeX, and I almost always use
KOMA-Script for that. For years now, however, KOMA-Script has been able to do
everything I need. Furthermore, the number of documents I create is steadily
decreasing; or rather, I’m creating the same types of documents over and over
again, just with different content. As a result, I can no longer test new
features in KOMA-Script sufficiently well in my daily work. Even if I use the
current beta version of KOMA-Script for all my documents, I’ll therefore
hardly find any new bugs.

At the same time, the long-time beta testers are either in the same situation
as I am, or—again, just like me—have long since stopped being students and are
now in the middle of their professional careers, with correspondingly little
to no time to read the documentation and, above all, to test. At the same
time, the long-time testers are now so proficient in LaTeX that they can
cope even with rather cryptic documentation. So errors are no longer being
found from this side either, and there is no longer sufficient feedback on the
documentation.

All of this means that development is indeed continuing, as can be seen from
the changes in the next version, but this development is so untested that I
cannot in good conscience unleash it on the world.  So I fear that with a new
release, a wave of support requests and complaints will come crashing down on
me, which I will then certainly be unable to handle.

There’s only one way to solve this problem: If you’re eager for new versions
of KOMA-Script, then become a beta tester and test reader for new sections of
the documentation! […]

So long  
*Markus*
