---
title: "Everything's new in … July"
description: "The new “KOMA-Script and Friends” website is online. Markus Kohm describes the move from a dynamic CMS to statically generated pages and what that means for search, security and maintenance."
date: 2026-07-07
author: "Markus Kohm"
tags: ["Communication", "Development", "Blog"]
image: "/images/komascript/KOMA-blue.png"
---

It's done! As of today, the new “KOMA-Script and Friends” website can be found
at komascript.de. All remaining pages from the old "KOMA-Script Documentation
Project" have either been adapted for the [How-To pages in the
Wiki](https://sourceforge.net/p/koma-script/wiki-en/HowTo/), formatted for
[new friends](/en/friends) or the [blog](/en/news), moved to the
[archive](/en/docs/koma-script/archive), or deleted as not worth keeping. To be
clear: The old pages are now truly and genuinely gone.

The new “KOMA-Script and Friends” or “[KOMA-Script und Freunde](/de)” no
longer uses a dynamic CMS where pages are retrieved from an SQL database and
processed via PHP. Instead, everything is generated as static pages using
[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/). Nevertheless— at least on komascript.de—search
functionality is still available. For this, [Fuse.js](https://www.fusejs.io/)
is used. The search index is also generated statically when the pages are
built.

One advantage of static pages for the user is that the pages are generally
delivered quickly. An advantage for me is that, with the elimination of the
CMS layer, potential entry points for hackers are also eliminated. For
example, the “KOMA-Script Documentation Project” had been under attack for
weeks with a dictionary or brute-force attack targeting the admin account.
Such attacks are now completely futile. Furthermore, there is no longer any
dependency on specific PHP versions.

One common advantage is that the pages can be easily transferred to another
server. This made it possible, for example, to mirror them on
[SourceForge](https://koma-script.sourceforge.io). However, the search
function does not work there due to a limitation of the web server. This is a
known issue, and a [feature
request](https://sourceforge.net/p/forge/feature-requests/956/) has been
submitted. So if you’d like to have the search function there as well, you
should support this request. SourceForge also doesn’t offer the option to
define your own error pages. For unknown pages, you’ll see the standard
SourceForge error page.

A minor drawback for me is that there are no longer any statistics on page
views. So I don’t know what people are interested in and what they
aren’t. However, considering the significantly lower amount of effort I have
to put into maintenance, I can live with that just fine.

Since, during the transition from the “KOMA-Script Documentation Project” to
“KOMA-Script and Friends,” the new pages on komascript.de were available via the
`about/` subdirectory, I set up a
corresponding redirect for a certain period of time.

A major improvement from the old “KOMA-Script Documentation Project” to the
new “KOMA-Script and Friends” is that the pages are available in both German
and English.  To switch languages, simply expand the currently displayed
language in the left-hand menu and then select the other language. However,
particularly in the archive and on the blog, not all pages are available in
both languages.

I’m satisfied for now and hope that users will also be able to manage just
fine.

So long  
*Markus*

P.S.: Just like with various other pages here on “KOMA-Script and Friends”
[DeepL](https://www.deepl.com) was helpful in translating this blog post.
